# **Phylo_PC**

This repository contains the code for generating the results for paper "Characterizing and mitigating 
confounding by unreplicated events in phylogenetic regression".

## **Notebooks Overview**

* **`Figure_PC_Contributions.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Fig. 1. Computes and visualizes contributions of branches to the eigenvectors of
  the phylogenetic variance-covariance matrix for Felsenstein's Worst Case and a Yule tree of 10 species.

* **`Figure_Simulations_I.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Fig. 2. Analyzes the false positive rate after adding eigenvectors in ordinary least squares (OLS)
  and phylogenetic generalized least squares (PGLS) for different types of ultrametric trees when the data is generated by a pure
  Brownian motion with no additional shifts.

* **`Figure_Simulations_II_Part1.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Fig. 3. Creates quantile-quantile plots showing the performance of different methods in
  controlling phylogenetic confounding when there is a shift on the tree.

* **`Figure_Simulations_II_Part2.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Fig. 4. Invetigates the performance of using eigenvectors in PGLS to remove phylogenetic confounding
  in a model with 16 tips related by a Yule tree with non-Brownian shifts in both predictor and outcome variables.

  Also creates Figs. S7, S8, and S9.

* **`Figure_Simulations_III.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Fig. 5. Analyzes the recall after adding eigenvectors in phylogenetic generalized least squares (PGLS)
  for Yule trees of varying numbers of species and different non-zero values of the true egression coefficient $\beta$.

* **`Figure_Simulations_IV.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Fig. 6. Compares the performance using eigenvectors in phylogenetic generalized least squares (PGLS) versus
  robust regression on phylogenetic independent contrasts (PIC) in different scenarios. Investigates both the false positive rate and the recall.

* **`Figure_Cichlids.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Fig. 7. Visualizes contributions of branches to the phylogenetic eigenvectors for the tree of
  African cichlids and investigates the effect of including phylogenetic eigenvectors on detection of coevolution of gene-expression levels.

  Generates results for Fig. S23. Visualizes the number of pairs that fall into different bins of estimated $\beta$ sizes as more eigenvectors
  are included in phylogenetic generalized least squares (PGLS) to detect coevolution of gene-expression levels in African cichlids.

  Generates results for Fig. S24. Creates a quantile-quantile plot showing the performance of using eigenvectors in phylogenetic generalized least squares
  (PGLS) on detection of coevolution of gene-expression levels in African cichlids.


* **`Supplementary_1.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Figs. S1, S2, and S3. Computes and visualizes contributions of branches to the phylogenetic eigenvectors
  for Felsenstein's Worst Case, a Yule tree of 10 species, and a caterpillar tree of 10 species using different realizations of variance-covariance matrix.

* **`Supplementary_2.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Figs. S4 and S5. Compares the performance of using eigenvectors of non-centered and double-centered
  phylogenetic variance-covariance matrices in OLS and PGLS to remove phylogenetic confounding for different types of trees.

* **`Supplementary_3.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Fig. S6. Analyzes the false positive rate after adding eigenvectors in OLS and PGLS for different types
  of non-ultrametric trees when the data is generated by a pure Brownian motion with no additional shifts.

* **`Supplementary_4.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Fig. S13. Investigates the performance of pure PGLS to remove phylogenetic confounding
  in models with 16 tips related by a Yule tree with a non-Brownian shift in both predictor and outcome variables.

* **`Supplementary_5.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Figs. S10 and S11. Investigates the performance of using eigenvectors in PGLS to remove
  phylogenetic confounding in a model with 16 tips related by a Yule tree with two non-Brownian shifts in both predictor and outcome variables.

* **`Supplementary_6.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Fig. S12. Investigates the performance of using eigenvectors in PGLS to remove phylogenetic confounding
  in a model with 16 tips related by a Yule tree with multiple non-Brownian shifts in both predictor and outcome variables.

* **`Supplementary_7.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Fig. S14. Compares the performance of using eigenvectors of non-centered and double-centered
  phylogenetic variance-covariance matrices in OLS and PGLS to remove phylogenetic confounding for different types of trees
  when the true regression coefficient $\beta$ is 0.5.

  Generates results for Fig. S15. Investigates the recall after adding eigenvectors in OLS and PGLS for Yule trees of
  varying numbers of species and different non-zero values of the true egression coefficient $\beta$.

* **`Supplementary_8.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Figs. S16 and S17. Investigates the recall after adding eigenvectors in OLS and PGLS
  in a model with 16 tips related by a Yule tree with a non-Brownian shift in both predictor and outcome variables
  for different non-zero values of the true egression coefficient $\beta$.

* **`Response_beta.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Figs. S18 and S19. Investigates the estimates of the regression coefficient $\hat{\beta}$
  after adding eigenvectors in OLS and PGLS in a model with 16 tips related by a Yule tree with a non-Brownian shift
  in both predictor and outcome variables for different non-zero values of the true egression coefficient $\beta$.

* **`Response_PIC_robust.ipynb`**

  Generates results for Fig. S20. Creates a quantile-quantile plot showing the performance of different robust regression methods in
  controlling phylogenetic confounding when there is a shift on the tree.

  Generates results for Fig. S21. Investigates the performance of using S and MM estimators of robust regression in combination with
  phylogenetic independent contrasts (PIC) to remove phylogenetic confounding in a model with 16 tips related by a Yule tree
  with multiple non-Brownian shifts in both predictor and outcome variables.

  Generates results for Fig. S22. Analyzes the recall of using S and MM estimators of robust regression in combination with
  phylogenetic independent contrasts (PIC) for Yule trees of varying numbers of species and different non-zero values of
  the true regression coefficient $\beta$.

## **Folder**

* **`Figures_2.0/`**

  Contains all the figures (Figs. 1 to 7 and S1 to S24) in both `.pdf` and `.svg` formats.


  
